For decades, the Three Gorges Dam has
stood as a symbol of China's engineering
might.
A project so vast that NASA said it
measurably altered the Earth's rotation,
making days. 006 microsconds longer. The
Three Gorges Dam generates more
electricity than any other power plant
on Earth. Enough to light up more than
70 million homes a year.
But on the edge of the Himalayas, China
is [music] planning something even more
ambitious. On a river you may never have
heard of.
>> This is the project of a century.
>> The most impressive power generation
system ever envisioned.
>> It's the hydropower equivalent [music]
of a mission to Mars.
>> But to build it, China must tunnel
through mountains that are still rising
in one of the most earthquakerprone
[music]
places on the planet. And that's not
all.
What happens here could affect hundreds
of millions of lives downstream in
neighboring India and Bangladesh,
risking new tensions over water. The
engineering is unprecedented.
So are the stakes.
There is like this stark beauty. It was
called the roof of the world because uh
it's the highest part of the world.
>> From the glacial melt [music] here, the
Yaong Sanangpo River flows over a
thousand km east along the edge of the
Tibetan plateau before performing what
many consider a geological miracle. at a
location known as the Great [music]
Bend, right where the plateau meets the
Himalayas.
>> It does this mad turn. So, it stops
flowing east and does a big hook and
starts coming back and flowing west.
>> About 180° [music] bend uh where the the
river drops about 2,000 m in elevation
in [music] just a 200 km period. Then
the river leaves China, goes into India
and there it's known as the Brahmapucha
and then it empties out in the Bay of
Bengal.
>> [music]
>> But [music] it's back at the Great Bend
where construction of the Yasha or Lower
Yalong Hydropower Project officially
began in July 2025.
It's a place so remote a road only
reached it in 2013.
The Gorge of the Great Bend is the
biggest canyon in the world. It's
literally three times [music] deeper and
a little bit longer than the Grand
Canyon in Arizona.
>> It's this natural drop, the world's
steepest [music] and deepest, that also
gives the plateau its greatest
hydropower potential.
Those following the project say China's
ambition is not just to tap this power,
but to utterly dominate it.
The energy generation from this [music]
project will break like records in in
like many different dimensions. It will
be by far the world's largest individual
source of energy. 60 gawatt of installed
capacity.
>> The Chinese government has said that
this will generate about 300 billion
kwatt hours [music] a year. That's more
than the UK uses an entire year. It's
also about three times more than the
three gorge generates. With little known
officially about the project, including
the construction timeline, analysts
outside China, have had to rely on
social media, state television, and
satellite images [music] to piece
together its design.
>> Not so long ago, an article was
published in Nature, one of the premier
peer-reviewed academic [music] journals,
that roughly describes the project as a
diversion project.
Unlike a traditional walled dam,
observers believe this one would be made
up of [music] a series of hydropower
stations along the river. Theories vary,
but some outside experts suggest there
would be one upstream dam with a large
reservoir to regulate the water flow.
This would be followed by a second
smaller dam at the top of the gorge
where water would be diverted from the
Great Bend through the mountains via a
number of underground tunnels and
turbines before potentially entering
another smaller reeregulation dam at the
bottom of the gorge. This could
stabilize [music] the flow before the
river continues downstream into India.
>> This will be quite an engineering feat.
After all, you're literally
reconstructing a whole river
underground. The volume of water that
will be diverted here um will be similar
to the discharge of a medium-sized river
such as like the Rine in in Europe.
>> It's a concept already tested at the
Jinping Dams where engineers diverted
the river through the mountains.
But what is really novel about this
project is just like its sheer scale
where like many engineers would have
probably not believed that building such
a project in such a remote location
would be even possible.
The government announced the project
would cost$1.2 trillion yuan. That's
about 167 billion US. And that compares
to the three gorges when it was built
completed back in the 2000s. It ended up
at a cost of about $ 37 billion. So this
is four to five times as much as that.
>> But experts say for China, this project
is [music] not just about generating
power. It's a core tenant of its
national economic strategy.
>> China [music] is an engineering state.
And one of the things that you know
having an engineering society [music] in
China has done is that it's a government
that likes to build its way out of
problems.
The dam to some extent [music] is an
extension of China's bias towards
production towards investment. But it
comes at a very interesting time.
[music] China is striving to make this
transition from investment to
consumption [music] based growth. So the
dam at this point would provide a
critical [music] demand boost at a time
when consumption and investment have
been weak.
It's a project [music] that promises an
economic jolt for sectors like
construction, cement, and steel.
>> When the project was announced, it it
rippled through the economy. Companies
like Power Construction Corp of China,
[music] China Engineering Corp, Washing
Cement, their share prices all surged.
But at another level, the [music] dam
will also enable China to produce more
renewable energy [music] and help that
green transition with a target of net
zero emissions by60. China has said the
project could cut 300 million tons of
carbon emissions a year by replacing
fossil fuel power. It's also about
[music] energy security, generating more
power domestically as demand surges for
energy hungry tech.
But building this records shattering
mega project in one of the most [music]
remote and geologically unstable regions
on Earth tests the boundaries of modern
engineering.
In order to build a dam like this,
you're dealing with intense energies and
intense altitudes,
landslides, [music] freezing,
malfunctioning equipment, people falling
off the side of mountains.
They are building this massive project
on a site where [music] six tectonic
plates connect up.
>> That makes this one of the world's most
earthquakerprone regions. In fact,
[music] in 1950, a magnitude 8.6
earthquake, one of the largest ever
recorded in human history, occurred in
[music] the area.
>> For the last 40 years, China has
developed the best hydropower engineers
in the world by far. They're not
magicians and they can't stop tectonic
plates [music] and they can't stop
earthquakes. So that's a massive danger.
And even if the earthquake doesn't
happen, these type of projects tend to
have slow disasters happen within them.
So they they seep [music]
plastic and concrete into the
surrounding environment and that changes
the entire environment of that place
slowly over time.
The International Campaign for Tibet
also warns that dam projects frequently
displace thousands from ancestral lands
and sever traditional livelihoods with
little consultation or support. The
Three Gorges project, which required the
forcible relocation of 1.3 million
people from a much more heavily
populated region, submerged [music]
large sections of the river valley,
damaging habitats for many endemic
species.
China has done this before. Over the
last two decades, China's 12 dams along
the Mikong have reshaped the river and
the lives that depend on it downstream.
The Meong runs about 4,500 kilometers
from the Tibetan plateau in China
through Myanmar, Laos, Thailand,
Cambodia, and Vietnam.
This river is the lifeblood of people
for those countries. Tens of millions of
people rely on natural resources that
come right out of the river.
China doesn't share information on its
dam building with the downstream
countries of the Meong doesn't let the
countries know the designs of the dams,
how they're going to be operated when
ground breaks, when the reservoirs start
to [music] fill, let alone how they're
operating in real time.
Those who [music] study the river say
this has left communities in the dark
and unable to rely on the river's
seasonal floods and [music] droughts.
The Meong is mighty because of its
seasonal flood pulse. And this flood
pulse drives the Meong's fishery. It
drives the agricultural production.
[music]
What dams do is reduce the peak. At
times they can reduce the peak
downstream by 20% 2,000 km away.
>> But in areas closer to the dam, like
here in northern Thailand, those
fluctuations are felt even more acutely.
>> In the dry season, the pattern reverses.
Water released for hydropower can push
the river levels three times higher than
normal.
As a result, environmentalists say the
ecology of the river has been disrupted
and the reproductive cycles of the fish
and birds upended. What were once
thriving fishing villages are now
diminished.
people there have been suffering for
years. Uh they lose their livestock,
they lose their equipment, they lose
their gardens and farms when these
sudden pulses of water come through.
It's the same lack of data and
transparency that has fuel concern
downstream from the lower Yalong
hydropower project in India and
Bangladesh.
While India's Brahmautra River is fed by
[music] other tributaries too, experts
say nearly 40% of its fertile sediment
comes from the Yalong Sangpo [music]
Gorge, sustaining millions of lives and
livelihoods.
Both countries have have come to China
and said that they want more information
about it. Uh they want to know what the
downstream effects are going to be and
they're wanting more than anything else
assurances that the downstream flow of
the river that turns into the Brahmautra
won't be too impacted by this hydropower
project.
>> The border here has long been disputed
and reports suggest officials in New
Delhi fear Beijing could weaponize the
water controlling it for political
leverage. The Chinese government's
counter to to concerns from India,
Bangladesh, and others has been that the
same amount of river coming out of the
canyon now will be coming out of it
after it's done. And there won't be huge
retention dams that could allow them to
hold back water in the case of some sort
of geopolitical conflict in the future.
But still [music] tensions remain. India
is countering China with the
construction [music] of its own mega dam
on the upper Xang 90 km below the
[music] border. even as it faces local
resistance and environmental scrutiny
without knowledge exchange in
cooperation across that border then it's
really easy to play on people's fears
>> and what I think it's really important
is that these decisions are made on like
quantifiable open and like objective
data that enable us international
scientists but also importantly like
people whose livelihoods are at [music]
stake in that river basin actually have
a A the objective of this discussion
here is not to like vilify China or to
basically put this project into a bad
light. Indeed, it would have a major
impact and major benefit for China's
target to become [music] more carbon
neutral which would have major
implications for the global climate.
>> If China can pull this off, then it's a
statement to the rest of the world
[music] to say like we're reshaping
rivers. We're we're creating clean
energy. We're providing our economy and
companies with [music] infinite clean
energy that it can use to build the
economy of the future.
[music]